Firstly, I thought some blippy timbres present in Turenas were similar to that of the beginning of
Truax’s Riverrun or other time segment processing forward works such as Blackburn’s Ice Breaker or
Risset’s Sud. I find this interesting because while crisp natural sounds of water, shells, wood,
etc. in Riverrun and Ice Breaker were exclusively done through granular synthesis, Turenas involved
the FM synthesis of such “natural” timbres instead. Though Chowning stated that the FM synthesis
context of the piece was just the “technical background” and that “the piece is not about the
background”, I still think that his decision to synthesize his natural timbres instead of using
recordings adds to the piece itself. I think about how just like Truax, Risset, Blackburn, Chowning
was guided and inspired by perhaps the liveliness of natural sounds and especially water sounds.
Additionally, to contrast the granulation and synthesis of natural sounds, in say Riverrun, Truax
granulates natural sounds into something that sounds synthesized whereas Chowning sculpts his
synthesis to sound natural. The original timbre of the water is still heard in the grains of
Riverrun and of course the synthesis of Turenas never fully replicate something completely natural,
leading to sounds that are similar to each other in idea or concept and broad timbre, but different
in a very nuanced way.

Secondly, I’d like to compare Chowning’s Voices for Soprano and Interactive Computer v.3 and
Embosquecerse by Juan Pampin and Abigail Jara. Both pieces involve a live performance element as well
as a synthesis element that is influenced by the live performance. For Embosquecerse, it’s dancers
wearing sensors that track their movements and for Voices for Soprano and Interactive Computer v.3,
it was Maureen Chowning’s voice. John did talk broadly about his stack/setup for the piece,
specializing the soprano’s voice with FM synthesized background vocals matching that of the
soprano’s “target pitch”. If I were to attempt something similar using my knowledge in
SuperCollider, it would probably rely on our machine listening tools and concepts. There should be
a pitch tracker that sends pitch information which is then used as an argument in a synthdef that
sounds like human singing voices. Perhaps for my skill level and lack of synthesis expertise, this
might involve pitch shifted vocal samples instead that are perhaps distorted to sound less natural
or perhaps as if they were synthesized. Additionally, while I’m not sure how exactly the sort of
granular noise was produced in the background, I’d attempt to recreate it by collecting amplitude
data and which is sent to a synthdef that creates that noise that creates more noise somewhat
proportional to how loud the soprano’s voice is. This all of course is taken with a microphone as
an input.
